>> National corporate funding
for "Frontline" is provided by
EarthLink.
>> And by NPR.
>> In Denver...
>> Skopje...
>> In Tehran...
>> Omaha...
>> In Istanbul...
>> In Hong Kong...
>> Belgrade...
>> In Decatur...
>> In Seattle...
>> Beijing...
>> In Pittsburgh...
>> In Johannesburg...
>> This is NPR News.
Additional funding is provided
by the Charles H. Hood
Foundation.
And by these funders.
"Frontline" is made possible
by contributions to your PBS
station from viewers like you.
Thank you.
>> Five, four, three, two, one.
>> I think the problem parents
have is that once their kid
becomes a teenager, for a brief
period of time it's as though
they've been invaded by another
body.
>> They need to learn how to
relate to being a kid.
I think they forgot.
>> We now know that there's a
lot of dynamic activity.
In many ways, it's the most
tumultuous time of brain
development since coming out of
the womb.
>> I swear to God, I'm never
talking to any of your friends
again.
I'll never talk to you again.
I swear to God!
>> No!
You don't have to... Did I say
anything?
Did I say, "No, you couldn't sit
here"?
>> Those cells and connections
that are used will survive and
flourish.
Those cells and connections that
are not used will wither and
die.
>> With all of the things that
teenagers have available to
them, their sleep has been
shoved into an ever-narrowing
window.
>> Living in teenage life today
is completely different from
before.
I know it's very stressful on
adults, but they're going to
have to realize that it's
today's world.
That's how it is.
>> NARRATOR: Tonight,
"Frontline" takes you inside the
teenage brain a
>> NARRATOR: The sun is up, and
inside the O'Donnell's house,
they are trying to get Charlie
up.
>> Charl... Charl?
>> What!
>> NARRATOR: Pam tries.
>> Come on.
>> No!
>> NARRATOR: And then Charles,
Sr.
>> Charles, time to get up.
>> No, just leave me alone!
>> All right, well...
>> Get out.
I want to sleep.
>> All right, well, time to get
up.
I'll give you ten minutes.
>> By the time he gets up in the
morning to the time he walks out
the door, there's a matter of,
like, 11 minutes maximum.
So he's a procrastinator.
He'll just stay in bed.
>> NARRATOR: They happen to live
in East Providence, Rhode
Island, but parents everywhere
will recognize the look and the
pacing.
It's a school day, and there is
a teenager to get out of bed.
>> We have to remind him do your
hair, get your books, take your
backpack, have your key for the
house.
It's a normal routine type of
thing.
>> Did you study?
>> No.
How do you study math?
>> Practice.
>> Yippee.
Bacon's a little burnt.
>> Yeah, sorry about that.
He's a very friendly person.
He's very outgoing.
He's very well liked outside the
house.
It's almost like he's a
different kid than he is at home
because they don't get the
attitude that we get.
( Charles burps )
>> About three more days, you're
all done; school's out.
>> Uh-uh, only one more.
>> How come you don't have to go
to school on Friday?
>> 'Cause that's when the
unofficial report cards are
distributed.
>> Well, maybe it'd be a good
idea for you to go into school.
>> No, they're mailing it.
Why bother going in and getting
out at 10:30?
I don't have to go in.
>> We'll see.
Pam and I are trying to make
sure that Charlie does well in
high school so that he doesn't
unknowingly close some doors on
himself for future
opportunities.
It was nice of your mother to
cook breakfast for you this
morning.
Did you say thank you?
>> Yes, I did, Dad.
>> That's good.
>> Did I, Mom?
>> No, you didn't.
You're welcome.
>> Can I have another drink of
orange juice?
>> NARRATOR: If parents often
wonder what is going on inside
the teenage brain, tonight, some
answers-- perhaps more than most
parents expect.
Here at the University of
Minnesota, this $2 million
machine is revealing the secrets
of another 15-year-old boy to
his father.
While Colin Nelson lies calmly,
a scanning machine-- a magnetic
resonance imager-- will open a
window into his brain.
The details are there, but what
does this picture mean about
mood, learning, memory?
>> So he has a good hippocampus.
How come he doesn't remember to
take out the garbage in the
morning?
( scanner beeping )
I wonder if he's awake.
The first time we scanned him,
when he was about nine, with all
that noise he fell asleep.
( scanner beeping )
>> NARRATOR: Charles Nelson is a
neuroscientist and child
psychologist at the University
of Minnesota.
>> Teenagers have-- particularly
when they're first becoming
teenagers-- have every reason to
believe and to feel that no one
understands them, that they
themselves are sometimes
surprised at what flies out of
their mouth.
And... and a personal example is
when my son was 12, he one day
just blurted something out and
then grinned, and he thought...
he thought out loud, "Where did
that come from?"
>> NARRATOR: His father is
trying to answer this question.
Slowly a picture is emerging of
the brain of a boy not yet an
adult, not quite a child.
>> ...we can correlate it with
real life.
If we show activation in the
hippocampus, the question would
be, why is it that in this
particular case of Colin, why he
doesn't remember to bring his
books home from school?
I think the problem parents have
is they... no matter how well
they think they know their kid,
once their kid becomes a
teenager, for a brief period of
time it's as though they've been
invaded by another body or
another brain.
And suddenly they don't quite
know that kid anymore, and they
get thrown off balance.
>> We're bending.
It's a give-and-take situation.
>> They still... like, they're
only about like that.
They've still got, like, that
much more to go.
>> Well, it takes a lot to let
go.
>> Not for me.
>> For me, it does.
>> You gotta be relaxed.
>> I am cool.
There's nobody cooler than me,
let me tell you.
It just takes a lot, you know.
We've raised you to the best of
our ability.
You may think that we're
paranoid or we're uncool or
we're too strict...
>> All of the above.
>> That's what works for us, we
feel.
>> But you're not the kid.
You don't have to abide by your
own rules.
>> I have to abide by his rules.
>> NARRATOR: In an artist's
studio in Cincinnati, Jim
Borgman is capturing the flash
points of life with teens.
A Pulitzer prize winner, Borgman
developed the popular "Zits"
cartoon with artist Jerry Scott.
Now syndicated in 900
newspapers, Jeremy and his comic
strip family are familiar to
parents everywhere.
>> 90% of the letters we get
fall into one wonderful
category, which are, "You must
have a camera in our house."
Or, you know, "This is my son
exactly, I can't believe it.
How are you doing it?"
Jeremy is 15 years old, he can't
drive, he's still stuck within
the orbit of his parents' rules,
and they are still a much bigger
factor in his life than he would
like.
And so there's that moment
before he can get out of the
house and drive off on his own
when there is the maximum
tension in the house.
>> Many parents are thrown for a
loop when their kids get to be
an adolescent, in some respects.
And what I think they need to do
is recognize that this is just
another phase of child
development, and even though
their children may be shouting
more and talking back more and
kicking and... and throwing
temper tantrums, it's just a
temper tantrum in a five-foot-
tall body instead of an 18-inch-
long body.
>> NARRATOR: And Nelson knows.
He's an expert on little babies.
This one, Natalie Aune, can
already recognize her mother's
voice and she's just a week old.
By measuring small brain waves,
researchers at Nelson's lab at
the University of Minnesota can
show how babies are learning
quickly, taking in data from the
vivid world around them.
That period of dramatic growth
in Natalie's brain will happen
once again, just before she
becomes a teenager.
>> I think the transition into
puberty is analogous to the
transition to being a baby in
many respects.
That a child suddenly is
undergoing fairly substantial
changes in their brain
development at a very, very
rapid pace.
And that period of time, often
that lasts only a year or two,
is a time where we really need
to pay very close attention to
what's happening to our kids.
>> NARRATOR: But paying
attention to a teenager brings a
different set of challenges.
>> We have rules that you have
to follow while you're in the
house-- like it or not.
>> Did you like your father's
rules?
>> Probably not.
>> You don't remember it?
"Probably"?
>> I still have a good
relationship with my father,
Charlie.
>> Yeah, but did you like his
rules?
>> I would assume he had rules
that I didn't care for.
But while I was living in the
house, I had to abide by the
rules, and I feel, you know...
>> Did you want to move out of
there as soon as possible
because of those rules?
>> No.
>> They need to learn how to
relate to being a kid.
I think they forgot.
Stuff like that.
Let us make our own mistakes.
>> NARRATOR: 15 years old, a
teenager with wheels that are
too small, with ambitions to
drive, to fly in a larger world.
Late at night Dr. Jay Giedd
heads to work.
He, too, is grappling with the
teenage world, trying to
untangle the workings and
wirings of the adolescent brain.
This doctor is crossing over a
new threshold to a fresh
understanding of adolescence.
>> I think people for
generations have been fascinated
by teen behavior and what is
happening in teens.
But for so long to actually look
inside the biology of teen
behavior has been very elusive.
And we just haven't had the
technology or the tools to... to
try to peer into the so-called
black box.
>> NARRATOR: But now he does.
Dr. Giedd of the National
Institute of Mental Health gets
the use of this imaging machine
one night a week to look at the
brain structure of normal
children.
Teens come in and sometimes even
sleep in this large magnet so he
can take a long, hard look
inside their brains.
>> Now for the first time in our
human history, we can actually
start exploring the living,
growing, activity of the human
brain.
Five, four, three, two, one,
blast off.
>> NARRATOR: What he discovered
in the all-important part of the
brain that sits behind the
forehead in an area called the
frontal cortex was an unexpected
growth spurt, an overproduction
of cells just before puberty.
>> This is a process that we
knew happened in the womb, maybe
even the first 18 months of
life.
But it was only when we started
following the same children by
scanning their brains at two-
year intervals that we detected
a second wave of overproduction.
And this second wave of
overproduction is manifest by an
actual thickening in the gray
matter or the thinking part, in
the front parts of the brain.
>> Many people mistakenly
believe that most of the changes
occurred in the first few years
of life, and then after a child
was about three, there was
actually relatively little
change occurring.
And... and we know now that's
absolutely incorrect.
>> Well, I think the most
surprising thing has been how
much the teen brain is changing.
By age six, the brain's already
95% of its adult size.
But the gray matter, or thinking
part of the brain, continues to
thicken throughout childhood as
the brain cells grow extra
connections, much like a tree
growing extra branches, twigs,
and roots.
>> NARRATOR: It's like this: the
brain grows like a tree.
First there is a flurry of
growth.
Then unused branches or pathways
are pruned.
And it is this pruning that
gives the tree its shape for the
future.
>> I'll hold this in position
because it has to have a little
bit of an angle.
I'm going to tighten this clamp.
Fingers first.
>> NARRATOR: For Charlie, as he
works in his uncle's garage, the
skills he's acquiring will
strengthen certain neural
pathways.
What he practices will combine
with his own genetic heritage to
consolidate the wiring in
certain parts of his brain and
not others.
>> The last thing you want to do
is give this thing...
>> Want me to hold it right
there?
>> Yes, right there is perfect.
>> The pruning-down phase is
perhaps even more interesting
because our leading hypothesis
for that is the use-it-or-lose-
it principle.
Those cells and connections that
are used will survive and
flourish.
Those cells and connections that
are not used will wither and
die.
So if the teen is doing music or
sports or academics, those are
the cells and connections that
will be hard-wired.
If they're lying on the couch or
playing video games or MTV,
those are the cells and
connections that are going to
survive.
>> NARRATOR: It is not only what
a teenager does that matters,
but how old he is and what the
immature brain is capable of
doing.
Some areas coordinate and
oversee others, and it is those
parts of the brain that have
long interested neuroscientists.
>> We've known for a long time
that what we actually call the
prefrontal cortex, the part that
sits behind your forehead, is
involved in planning behavior,
your use of strategies, a
technical term we call cognitive
flexibility, which is can you
change your mind and do you have
sort of a... a fluid way of
going about solving problems?
>> The part of the brain that is
the so-called CEO or the
executive of the brain is still
being built during the teenage
years.
Teens are capable of enormous
intellectual and artistic
accomplishments.
But that basic part of the brain
that gives us strategies and
organizing and perhaps warns us
of potential consequences isn't
fully on board yet.
>> NARRATOR: The risks of a
severe concussion or a turned
ankle, for instance.
An adult brain might call for a
helmet here or suggest this is
not quite the moment to take a
drag.
But when you're very good, very
determined, and very young, it's
easy to feel invulnerable.
>> On some occasions, I wear
helmets, but not that much.
I come here almost every day, so
it's not that much for me if I
fall because I'm kind of used to
it.
I just get little scrapes.
No, it's not that risky.
>> NARRATOR: Well, "not that
risky" would be one way to put
it.
>> What happened?
>> It's one of, like, the most
common-- either rolling or
wrists.
( children talking )
>> Adolescence has always been a
period of high risk.
We know that teenagers engage in
risky behavior, and they have
always engaged in risky
behavior.
There's nothing new about that
now.
And because the child, the 13-
or 14- or 15-year-old, still has
an immature frontal cortex, they
often do not make the most
responsible, reasoned decisions.
And by virtue of having things
available that can do harm, they
often wind up in a higher risk
group than I experienced as a
child myself.
( music playing )
>> NARRATOR: The prevalence of
drugs, for instance.
Here at a rave party, ecstasy
and other drugs are a kind of
rite of passage.
>> When you're on E, you love
everyone.
Like, I love you.
>> It's very similar to San
Francisco in 1969.
>> The way you feel.
Like, your hands are soft.
You can touch your face and your
skin is very, very soft.
People touch you; it's nice.
>> It's also a particularly
cruel irony of nature, I think,
that right at this time when the
brain is most vulnerable is also
a time when teens are most
likely to experiment with drugs
or alcohol.
If they're doing drugs or
alcohol that evening, it may not
just be affecting their brains
for that night or even for that
weekend, but for the next 80
years of their life.
>> Sullenous, boredom, one-word
answers, the misery, you know.
It always looks a lot more
humorous to us in retrospect.
( carnival music playing )
>> NARRATOR: At the old carousel
in Riverside, Rhode Island,
Brittany Husnander and her
friend Leah Crowell ride around
just as they did when they were
kids.
But now the thrills are
elsewhere.
>> So what happened last night?
Did you guys, like, kiss or
anything?
>> Nope.
>> Why not?
>> 'Cause.
>> 'Cause why?
>> I don't know if I want to.
>> Why not?
>> I don't know.
>> Okay.
( laughs )
How come you wouldn't give him
an answer, Leah?
I want you to go out with him.
>> Then why do you make it so
complicated?
>> There's nothing to do in
Riverside; it's so boring.
We don't.. we just walk around.
That's all we ever do is, like,
walk around or, like... I don't
know.
We barely do anything.
We go to the beach sometimes.
Sometimes we go to the mall.
Sometimes we go to the movies.
But pretty much all we do is sit
around and just, like, talk or
go in the pool or whatever.
It's boring.
>> NARRATOR: Brittany can change
from fed-up teen to focused
artist very quickly.
She's a good student with many
talents and a lot of support
from the teen expert in her
house, her mother, Beverley.
>> They're trying to make the
best way they can.
They're trying to put the pieces
together the best way they know
how.
And on top of it all, they're
going through this hormone thing
and peer pressure and all this
other stuff.
>> NARRATOR: Bev is sympathetic
to the ups and downs of teenage
life.
She is easy about Brittany's
swings in mood, able to tolerate
a lot of teenage angst.
>> Now she's aggravated.
Can't do nothing right these
last few days.
I wonder whose fault that is.
God bless the guy who's willing
to take her on because he's
going to have to be a very open
and comfortable person with
females, rather than being
intimidated by them.
>> No, he didn't!
>> NARRATOR: Brittany's not
going to be intimidated by her
brother, Brandon.
>> All right!
You're not going to deny that
they fought with me, too.
So why aren't you mad at them?
That's why I get mad at Leah.
I don't get mad at you because
Leah always sits in your room
with you and follows you guys
and talks to you guys.
I don't get mad at you; I get
mad at Leah.
So why are you mad at me?
Get mad at your friends!
Tell your friends to stay the
( bleep ) away from me.
>> Did I say anything?
Did I say, "No, you couldn't sit
here"?
>> I swear to God, I'm never
talking to any of your friends
again.
I'll never talk to you again, I
swear to God!
>> You don't have to stop
talking to us.
You can talk!
>> Brandon, what, am I not
supposed to live in my own
house?
They're here more than I am!
>> You live on Mike!
>> I swear to God, I'll be like,
"Mike, you need to move.
I live here and there's no other
seats on the couch, so I need to
lay down.
Get up."
>> You don't see me doing it to
your friends whenever someone
goes, "Want to go to
Buccaneers?"
You don't see me going, "Yeah,
I'll go with you.
I'll take the walk.
Oh, man, let's go."
>> All right, I'm sorry.
I'm sorry!
I'm sorry, I'm sorry.
>> NARRATOR: Bev Husnander
remains unperturbed.
She knows it could all pass in a
moment.
>> Give me a hug.
You need to hug me.
I hugged you.
>> Okay, that's good enough.
>> No, give me a hug.
Give me a hug.
Thank you.
( laughs )
>> We think that the dramatic
changes in mood-- for example, a
child having an outburst at one
moment and then being very calm
and happy the next-- is due in
part to changes in hormones,
because we know that as a child
enters puberty, these changes in
mood are much more dramatic.
And as a year or two after
puberty has begun, things level
down a little bit.
But we think the ultimate
responsibility for regulating
these mood changes resides in
the frontal cortex, and that's
what's overseeing this whole
operation.
>> NARRATOR: Jim Borgman, a
parent himself, recalls his own
teenage mood swings with great
clarity.
>> Remembering those years and
how they felt and how insecure
we were and how vulnerable we
felt and the sadness and the
loneliness and the confusion and
the isolation.
The strip is intended to be
funny, and I hope it is, but
there has to always be that
underlying layer of, you know,
the sudden touch you have as a
teenager with the deep well of
human experience.
>> NARRATOR: Nicole Ellis often
feels vulnerable, but today the
picture she's trying to portray
is of the self-assured Nicole,
the one who is running for
student council at a Toronto
high school.
>> I've been attending this
school for the past years and
noticed the lack of interest
taken to make the school more
exciting.
That's why I am running for
social convenor.
One of the things I'd like to
bring back is our school dance.
>> NARRATOR: Today the students
will give her a vote of
confidence.
>> It's your school; embrace it.
Thank you.
( cheers and applause )
>> NARRATOR: But for a teenager,
confidence is something clutched
at, seldom held.
>> One hour I could be really
happy and laughing, and the next
hour I am just really, really
upset.
Then there could be one whole
day I'm fine; then two days
later I'm just mad.
>> NARRATOR: Nikki lives with
her mother and two brothers.
Her mother, Gayle, knows the
turbulence of the teenage years.
>> I know her moods.
I know when something is
bothering her.
I know when she feels she
doesn't want to talk.
And I know when it is the time
to just leave her alone, and I
also know when there's a time to
find out and find out what's
bothering her ASAP.
I sort of have to feel her out.
>> Sometimes I just don't feel
like talking, period, and she
knows.
She knows that, so...
>> Like, are you feeling angry
inside, confused, what?
That's what she wants to...
>> I don't even know.
Sometimes I don't even know.
>> Sometimes she doesn't know.
>> Sometimes I don't even know
why I'm upset; I'm just upset.
>> She comes to me sometimes,
she says, "Mom, I feel like
crying."
So I sit down, put my arms
around her, let her cry.
>> The recent work on brain
development, in my mind,
enormously helps explain things
that we've known for some time
in child development.
So people who've studied
adolescence for many years have
pointed to these changes in
behavior that we've been
describing, these changes in
mood and fluctuations in mood
and the like, without quite
being able to pinpoint what was
responsible for those changes.
And now I think we have a much
better handle on that, and I
think my argument would be that
it's the changes going on in the
frontal cortex that gradually
give the child the ability to
regulate those powerful
emotions, solve problems more
effectively, to be more planful
in their behavior.
So what's really new here is our
ability to explain the child
development work that we've
known about for quite some time.
>> I find that the quickest way
to get shut out is to ask
questions about things that
you're not welcome to know or to
share.
So for me as a parent, it has
always been more a matter of
waiting for the oyster to open
and being present when it does.
>> NARRATOR: Dr. Deborah
Yurgelun-Todd and her associate
Staci Gruber are scanning the
brains of teenagers to see how
they read emotion.
The small but intriguing study
at McLean Hospital near Boston
is mapping differences between
the brains of adults and teens.
>> I came to this research with
the assumption that the teenager
was going to look a lot like an
adult.
In fact, I assumed that the 13-
year-old brain would respond
quite similarly to the adult
brain in terms of the kinds of
tasks that we were asking them
to do when they were in the
magnet.
>> NARRATOR: To explore this,
Todd put teenage and adult
volunteers through an MRI and
monitored how their brains
responded to a series of
pictures.
>> Here we go.
Ready?
Ready.
( electronic pulsing sound )
>> NARRATOR: The volunteers were
asked to discern the emotion on
these faces.
The results were surprising.
>> Well, one of the interesting
things about the findings are
that they suggest that the
teenagers are not able to
correctly read all the feelings
in the adult face.
>> NARRATOR: All the adults
identified this emotion as fear,
but the teenagers invariably saw
something different.
>> Patrick, how are you doing?
>> Fine.
>> Tell me about those faces?
What were those faces feeling?
>> A lot of them are shock or
angry and...
I think that was it.
>> Okay, shocked and angry.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay, thank you.
>> They see anger when there
isn't anger, or sadness when
there isn't sadness.
And if that's the case, then
clearly their own behavior is
not going to match that of the
adult.
So you'll see a miscommunication
both in terms of what they think
the adult is feeling, but also
and then what the response
should be to that.
>> NARRATOR: The reason for
this, she believes, is that
teenagers use a different part
of the brain to assess the
emotion on people's faces.
>> This is a really nice picture
highlighting the fact that in an
adolescent brain, the relative
activation of the prefrontal
region, or this anterior front
part of the brain, is less than
it is in the adults.
But in contrast to that, the
more emotional region, or that
gut-response region, has more
activation compared to the
adult, so that the relationship
between these two regions is
very different.
And we think that that's been a
very important finding in terms
of understanding adolescent
behavior.
>> NARRATOR: At Nikki Ellis's
high school, students often feel
that they are the ones who are
misunderstood-- not the other
way around-- with some
exceptions.
>> When you're looking on the
border and see you as central,
how does your family factor into
your life?
I would like a picture of you.
( laughter )
I don't want a mug shot.
I want a picture, okay?
>> NARRATOR: Patrick Knight is a
popular teacher, often acting as
a bridge between the students
and adults.
We asked Knight to gather a
group of his students to find
out what's on their minds.
>> What's a stereotype that's
placed upon teenagers shoulders
that bothers you?
>> That no matter what they're
doing, they're always causing
trouble.
Everything they do will end up
causing trouble in some way.
>> Young and stupid.
>> Yeah.
>> Just that they think we're
all liars.
They think... yeah, I think...
Not even that we're liars.
People, a lot of them, adults
think we're dumb.
That we don't know anything.
No, but not even that.
Remember, you can be just
walking... I've been standing
beside adults... I've stood
beside adults, and there could
be just a girl or a guy walking,
they don't look any way-- the
guy doesn't have no bandanas or
nothing-- and they'll just, "Oh,
look at them.
I don't know why teens love to
walk the street."
>> My dad thinks that, like, I
drink and I cause trouble.
He thinks I'm always looking for
ruckus and stuff.
That's not true.
>> The funniest thing, though,
is just, like, they think that
we're dumb and that we're
whatever.
And then some of these people
that have that attitude-- and
they've even said stuff to me
and some people-- they are the
biggest hypocrites I've ever
seen.
I was just like, "Okay, like, be
quiet," you know.
Like, "Look at yourself and then
fix yourself up before you judge
me."
>> The teenager is not going to
take the information that is in
the outside world and organize
it and understand it the same
way we do.
>> I'll just be sitting at home
watching TV, and my mom will
say, "Did you do that for me?"
I'll be like, "Oops, I forgot.
Sorry."
"You didn't forget.
You chose not to do it."
>> Exactly.
( laughter )
>> Yeah.
>> "You chose.
You decided that you did not
want to do that, because if you
wanted to do it, then you'd have
done it right away."
>> My mom, she'll say, "Oh, but
you didn't forget to roam the
street.
You didn't forget to go...
Oh..."
>> Exactly, exactly.
>> In terms of interactions at
the dinner table or on the
weekend or doing chores or doing
homework, it means that whatever
communication, whatever
conversation you have with them,
if you're assuming they
understood everything you said,
they may not have or they may
have understood it differently.
>> NARRATOR: The new ways of
looking at the brain point
scientists like Jay Giedd to a
different understanding of how
it works.
>> The cerebellum in the back of
the brain is the part of the
brain that changes most during
the teen years.
So this part of the brain has
not finished growing well into
the early 20s even.
( music playing )
The cerebellum used to be
thought to be involved in the
coordination of our muscles.
But we now know it's also
involved in coordination of our
thinking processes.
And just like one can be
physically clumsy, one can be
kind of mentally clumsy.
And this ability to smooth out
all the different intellectual
processes, to navigate the
complicated social life of the
teen and to get through these
things smoothly and gracefully
instead of lurching through
adolescence seems to be a
function of the cerebellum.
As a society we're less active
than we ever have been in the
history of humanity.
We're good with our thumbs and
video games and such, but as far
as actual physical activity--
running, jumping, playing--
children are doing less and less
of that.
The recess and play seem to be
the first thing that is cut out
of school curriculums in tight
times.
But those actually may be as
important or maybe even more
important than some of the
academic subjects that the
children are doing.
>> Often the hallmark of
recognizing that your kid has
become a teenager, after they
say something like, "I hate you,
Dad" or "I hate you, Mom," is
that suddenly they find
themselves sleeping until 11:00
in the morning, which they never
did before.
>> We're going to review this.
White House...
>> NARRATOR: First period is
just wrapping up in this ninth
grade English classroom.
>> We haven't done this, so
nobody has this yet.
Okay, this is the last story.
>> NARRATOR: The teacher is wide
awake, trying to inject a little
life into his students.
>> Number 12, okay, prodigious:
wonderful, of great size.
A lot of people got that mixed
up with poignant.
All right, prodigious, if we're
going to be technical.
Okay, prodigious.
>> What you see in the classroom
is a sea of sleepy faces and
drool on their notebooks and so
forth.
When we bring those kids into
the laboratory, what we see is a
phenomenon that's of a lot of
concern for us.
They start to look as if they
have a major sleep disorder.
>> NARRATOR: At a sleep lab in
Rhode Island, director Mary
Carskadon has become a world
expert on adolescents and how
they sleep.
She is disturbed by what her
studies show-- that most teens
are getting an average seven and
a half hours a night.
>> When you put that in the
context of what they need to be
optimally alert, which is nine
and a quarter hours of sleep,
it's clear that they're building
huge, huge sleep debts night
after night after night.
With all of the things that
teenagers have available to
them, from televisions and
telephones and computers, their
sleep has been shoved into an
ever-narrowing window.
Fundamentally, the issue is
they're not filling up their
tank at night, and so they're
starting the day with an empty
tank.
>> Okay, guys, I want to know
how many people had a problem
this morning getting out of bed?
All of you guys?
>> It's hard to get up because
sometimes my brother and my mom
will come wake me up, and like,
it will take... you know,
they'll have to come 15 times
before I actually get up.
>> What's interesting is there's
another part of their brain
that's the biological timing
system, or the circadian clock,
that actually helps to prop them
up at the end of the day.
>> NARRATOR: The circadian clock
shifts forward as children
become teenagers.
>> I'm so used to staying up so
late and everything; I just
can't fall asleep.
>> Like, 12:00 to, like, 1:00,
sometimes 2:00.
>> Why do you go to bed so late?
>> A whole bunch of stuff.
I can't sleep most of the time.
>> When they start the day with
the empty tank and there's no
biological clock helping them in
the morning, they really should
be home in bed sleeping, not
sleeping in the classroom.
>> I'm not a morning person at
all, not at all.
Like, when I get on the bus, I
don't even remember what happens
at home.
It's just like, blah, like
just...
It's all a big blur.
So, like, when they say I'm
grounded when I get home, I
don't remember what I did in the
morning.
>> The teenagers are really put
in a kind of a gray cloud when
they aren't having enough sleep.
It affects both their mood and
their ability to think and their
ability to perform and react
appropriately.
>> You're on again.
>> NARRATOR: Professor Carlyle
Smith at Trent University in
Canada specializes in sleep and
learning.
We asked Dr. Smith to run both
Nicole and Charlie through a
series of sleep studies.
>> Go.
>> NARRATOR: Both teens will
perform certain tasks, go to
sleep for the night, and come
back three days later to repeat
them.
It doesn't matter what skills
they have coming into the test.
It will simply measure, under
various amounts of sleep,
whether they will improve their
skills.
>> 15:04:7.
>> Mmm.
Almost half the time.
>> You were on there half the
time.
That's pretty good.
Go.
>> NARRATOR: The exercises are
designed to get the brain
learning something new.
>> Stop.
See what you got here?
Better than Charlie on his first
trial.
( Nicole laughs )
Just a minute.
>> NARRATOR: This test is a real
brainteaser.
It's like learning an equation
in math.
Not only does Charlie have to
trace something upside down, he
must visualize the task in his
brain and work from that
picture.
>> Can't get out of this thing.
>> The special worry with
teenagers is that they are
learning a tremendous amount and
trying to keep up with their
peers and so on.
They're often stretching almost
to the limit of what they can
do.
And sleeping in is one of the
best ways that they can do to
sort of stay abreast of what's
going on.
And let them do it.
>> Yeah, who makes the beds?
>> I do.
>> Can you make mine again?
>> Yeah, I'll make it up for
you.
Did you mess it up?
>> No, it was just from
everybody being in it.
>> Yeah, I'll make it nice for
you.
>> Hospital corners?
>> No.
>> No?
>> No, I'll give you lab
corners.
>> NARRATOR: It would seem hard
to go to sleep this way, but
Jeremy Jacob needs to measure
exactly what stage of sleep
Nikki is in.
He's particularly interested in
REM, rapid eye movement-- the
time of dreaming and learning.
The same part of the brain that
was working when the teens were
learning their new skills
continues to rehearse and
practice when the students
sleep.
The brain consolidates and
improves on what they have just
learned.
In a sense, the lessons are
effortless, happening while they
sleep.
>> The best predictor of how
well someone is going to do-- be
they at Harvard or wherever-- is
not their SAT scores or anything
else.
It's whether or not they got a
good night's sleep.
And then up again to two.
>> NARRATOR: Three days later
the teens are back.
>> Charlie and Nicole, one of
you got a normal night of sleep,
almost.
What normally happens is you
start off with what's called a
little stage one, and you go to
two, three, four.
Nicole, she got 105 minutes of
REM sleep.
That's quite a bit.
Charlie, on the other hand, you
only got 44 minutes.
You got less than half of what
she got.
So you're a little short on REM
sleep.
And as it turns out, that's
going to be pretty important as
to what happened to your tests.
>> NARRATOR: Smith had purposely
arranged for Charlie to have
less sleep.
Now after retesting the two
students, the evidence is clear
about how important sleep is to
learning.
>> You improved by 6% on the
ball and cup.
>> I improved?
>> You improved by 6%.
>> I did?
I thought I did crappy.
>> No, you improved by 6%.
But Nicole improved 11%.
We're looking at your degree of
improvement.
In terms of improvement, you
didn't improve as much as Nicole
did.
So she was over double what you
had.
Now, then, the mirror trace.
This we think requires REM
sleep.
Nicole, who got lots of REM
sleep, she improved 44%.
And you, Charlie, you were worse
by 10%.
I can't tell you any more
clearly, having a good night's
sleep will give you more of an
advantage than anything else you
can do.
Now, you can relearn this stuff,
but you're going to run out of
time.
Every day you say, "Well, I'll
catch up."
But while you're catching up,
Nicole is busy going ahead.
I think maybe you should go to
bed now.
( laughs )
>> NARRATOR: In response to the
studies that show many teenagers
are sleep-deprived, a number of
school districts across the
country have changed their
school start times.
In Minneapolis, high schools
start over an hour later than
they did five years ago.
Trevor Nelson notices a big
change in first-period class.
>> A lot of kids are talking,
awake, you know, smiling.
It's a lot more alert than it
was in middle school.
>> What we found as a result of
the later school time is the
students were attending classes.
They were more alert in class.
They're reporting... they're
reporting themselves being more
alert.
They're staying with the
discussion, with the teacher.
They're raising their hand.
They're being engaged as
learners instead of struggling
just to stay awake and... or
passively sitting there.
>> NARRATOR: Wahlstrom's recent
report on the Minneapolis school
experiment meant attendance was
up, but there was a downside,
particularly for middle school
students who now start two hours
later.
>> I think it's really hurt
after-school programs.
Occasionally I'll leave school
at 4:30 and I'll see students
leaving the building, and
then...  at middle schools.
And I think, "You have no time
to go have any kind of after-
school activities, including
tutoring or sports or anything,
before you need to be home and
having dinner with your
families," which is an important
time as well.
And I... you know, there's...
For every study that says kids
do better with a late start
times academically, there's
studies that say kids do better
when they're involved in
activities and sports and choirs
and drama and all those things.
And so I think it's limited the
amount of kids that can be
involved in that kind of stuff.
>> NARRATOR: It's not only
after-school activities that are
affected when school districts
change their start times.
Bus schedules, child care,
everything changes when the
school's start time shifts.
Even in Rhode Island, where much
of the groundbreaking sleep
research was done, later school
start times have met resistance.
>> There have been some other
districts where it's just sort
of blown up in the face of the
schools when they've tried to
delay.
The school is really the heart
of the community and the heart
of these families.
And if you do it without any
warning, you know, parents have
structured day care and child
care for the little ones being
provided by the older ones.
I mean, it just can get out of
control.
>> NARRATOR: Applying new
science to public policy has
always been tricky, and nowhere
more so than in areas that
affect children.
Take, for instance, the debate
over what science has said about
early childhood.
Parents used to be told that
mobiles, Mozart, and lots of
stimulation would make their
babies smarter.
If they didn't do it early,
there wouldn't be a second
chance.
We now know that simply isn't
true.
>> Brain science has told us
very little about what we can do
to raise our children and raise
our children better.
>> NARRATOR: John Bruer is the
author of a book "The Myth of
the First Three Years."
>> What we really have to be
careful of here is if we're
talking about how fast three-
year-olds learn or what kind of
moral decisions teenagers could
make, the relationships between
the behaviors and the desired
behaviors and the brain
structure is totally unknown.
So these... this simple,
popular, newsweekly magazine
idea that adolescents are
difficult because their frontal
lobes aren't mature is one we
should be very cautious of.
>> NARRATOR: Even Dr. Jay Giedd,
who seems to have penetrated
deep inside the teenage brain,
wonders about the kind of
lessons parents can draw from
his science.
>> The more technical and more
advanced the science becomes,
often the more it leads us back
to some very basic tenets.
And sometimes it's even
disappointing to people that
with all the science and with
all the advances, the best
advice we can give is things
that our grandmother could have
told us generations ago: to
spend loving, quality time with
our children.
>> So often what happens in the
United States is that we're on a
pendulum.
We go from saying this is good
to this is bad, and then we say
what was bad becomes good.
>> NARRATOR: Ellen Galinsky is a
social scientist and the
president of the Families and
Work Institute.
She has seen scientific fads
come and go, but she says her
research for a book about
children shows there are
enduring lessons for parents.
>> Even though the public
perception is about building
bigger and better brains, what
the research shows is that it's
the relationships, it's the
connections, it's the people in
children's lives who make the
biggest difference.
>> A lot of times older kids,
they seem to break away from
their parents a little bit.
It's like a feeling of freedom
or something.
And then they find that when
they get into a problem, they
want their parents' help, but
they don't want to, you know,
outright ask their parents.
>> You'd really like them just
to step in and say, "Hey, you
know, you don't seem too, you
know, happy today.
Is everything okay?"
Because sometimes-- I don't
know-- I have trouble asking,
you know, expressing my feelings
if someone doesn't come up and
ask first.
>> It's a surprise to me and
it's a surprise to every group
of parents or teachers with whom
I speak, is that kids are
actually yearning, teens are
yearning for more time with
their parents.
>> From since I was younger, she
was always there for me.
Whenever anything happened, it's
her; she's there.
Anything went down, you know,
when I'm feeling sad, whatever,
it doesn't matter when it is.
She's the type of person who'll
always makes sure you're fine.
Bye, Mom.
>> Bye, Nic.
See you later.
>> NARRATOR: Gayle Jarvis works
two jobs.
Every afternoon she heads out
for the evening shift, leaving
three kids behind.
Yet even though Gayle has to
spend a great deal of time away
from her children, they feel her
presence.
>> She's, like, always calling
from work.
I mean, she works till, like...
You've been to my house.
You've heard how much my mom
calls.
>> Her mom calls her just for
not eating food.
>> Okay, my mom, she's the way
that she has to make sure that
when we get up, you know...
when we come home, she finds out
how was our day.
As soon as we come... like, she
knows the time we come home--
ring, ring, ring.
( phone rings )
I'll bet you it's Mom.
>> Want to bet?
>> Bet you.
>> Okay.
>> Hello?
>> Hey.
>> Hi, Mom.
>> What's up?
>> What did I say?
>> Did Rodney come?
>> Yeah, we had to leave early.
He said he had to go straight to
work, so he said to say sorry.
>> Let me speak to her.
>> Hold on.
>> Hi, Mom.
>> Hi, hon.
What's up?
>> Nothing.
>> You have to be careful with
kids.
It's the time when you push them
off, that's the time when they
really need to... to be heard.
So you have to be very, very
careful because it's easy to
say, "Okay, call me later
maybe," you know, "We'll talk
later," but then later might be
a couple of minutes too late.
So you don't take that chance.
>> I hate how everyone says
that.
"Was that how it was when you
were younger?"
>> NARRATOR: Bev Husnander
spends a lot of time listening
to what's on the minds of her
kids.
Here she let us set up a camera
to observe a typical evening
with Brittany and her friend
Leah.
>> He's been suspended, like, a
hundred times, so he finally
quit school because he got... he
was never in school anyway
because he was suspended so many
times.
>> For what reason?
>> She went to class like
normal, she was just a little
out of it.
>> She just couldn't walk.
And then she passed out next to
the toilet.
>> So they just won't listen to
us no matter how hard we try, so
we have to suck it up, and...
>> And the name of my six-page
report was "How to help our
children in this 'me first'
culture."
Whatever that means.
>> I just wanted to be open.
I wanted them to be able to talk
back to me about anything and
not feel that they were going to
be reprimanded or thought
foolish or insignificant, or
they didn't know what they were
talking about because they were
children or because they were
kids.
I think kids are a lot smarter
and a lot in tuned to what's
going on than their parents ever
give them credit for.
>> Growing up, one of the things
I hated-- or even when I was an
adult in certain situations-- I
hated that feeling of when I got
home I know there was going to
be something that was going to
upset the apple cart, and that
feeling you get in the pit of
your stomach.
And I don't ever want them to
have that.
>> NARRATOR: Charlie O'Donnell
regards his mom as a good sport.
>> Ah!
>> NARRATOR: But he's still
continuously battling for more
independence.
>> I'm going to go to the air
force after high school, and
then I'll get my college paid
for, then go to college.
Doesn't really matter where.
I just want to get out of the
house.
I want to live in a dorm.
No parents' rules.
I'd have to set them for myself.
( laughter )
>> Separation is the whole job
of teenagers.
And as parents, what we would
say we want, what we truly want
in our hearts is to launch them
into rich, independent, textured
lives of their own.
And so in the teenage years,
here we get it, and it doesn't
always feel the way we thought
it would.
I have a friend who says that
teenagers plant their feet
firmly on your chest and launch
themselves off into their own
life.
And that's just how it feels
usually.
( laughs )
>> So I went back and I asked
teens, and they said, "Well,
yeah, we are pushing our parents
away because it's really hard
for us to come out and say, 'I
need you.'"
It makes them feel young, or,
you know, they want us to be
mind readers.
Okay, well, we can't be mind
readers.
But what they said is, "Hang in
there.
If we push you away, yeah, we
still want you, so hang in
there."
When you ask children whom they
admire, they often talk about
their parents.
If they have a good
relationship, they talk about
their parents.
>> I tell my mom mostly
everything.
Like, I don't tell her guy
things.
But, like, I tell her mostly
everything, like, about my
friends and everything.
I trust my mom with everything.
>> I admire my mom because she's
been raising me and my sister by
herself.
And she's... if you know me and
my sister, you know that she's
done a good job.
>> I think you can put more
trust in your mom than you can
in anybody else.
And I have no shame in saying I
love my mom.
My mom can be clear down the
hall and I'll bellow, "Hi, Mom,
I love you," just like that.
>> I got the golden ring!
>> This report continues on our
Web site, where you'll find
summaries of brain and sleep
research discussed in the
program, with details and
pictures of the brain's
development and how it affects
teens; online activities for
parents and teens on ways to
improve communication skills; a
report on the challenges of
applying cutting-edge science
like this to public-policy
decisions.
And find out here if your local
station is reairing this
program and when.
Then join the discussion at PBS
online: pbs.org.
Or write an e-mail to
frontline@pbs.org.
Or write to this address:
Captioned by
Media Access Group at WGBH
access.wgbh.org
>> National corporate funding
is provided by NPR.
>> In Denver...
>> Skopje...
>> In Tehran...
>> Omaha...
>> In Istanbul...
>> In Hong Kong...
>> Belgrade...
>> In Decatur...
>> In Seattle...
>> Beijing...
>> In Pittsburgh...
>> In Johannesburg...
>> This is NPR News.
>> And by EarthLink.
Additional funding is provided
by the Charles H. Hood
Foundation.
And by these funders.
"Frontline" is made possible
by contributions to your PBS
station from viewers like you.